modules/ROOT/pages/quarkus/getting-started-quarkus.adoc, before:

== Quarkus Quickstart 

This guide will show a quickstart how to create a Quarkus app and will briefly show the key functionalities that Quarkus provides and how to start as a beginner or also experienced developers.


== Introduction to Quarkus 

To get the first introduction to Quarkus you can read the link:../quarkus.adoc[Quarkus introduction guide]. To get a short overview where you can find the important Quarkus related guides follow the chapter link:../quarkus.adoc#guide-to-the-reader[guide to the reader].
Also, a comparison of the link:../quarkus.adoc#Pros[advantages] and link:../quarkus.adoc#cons[disadvantages] of a Quarkus application compared to the alternative framework Spring.
This comparison will be supported by our link:../performance-comparison-spring-quarkus.adoc[performance comparison between Spring and Quarkus] that shows the lower resource consumption and startup time of Quarkus applications.


== Installation of Tools and Dependencies

First, we need to install some dependencies and tools before we can start programming. Our tool https://devonfw.com/website/pages/docs/devonfw-ide-introduction.asciidoc.html[devonfw-ide] comes with many development tools for you.
We need to install the following tools for this guide.


* Maven 
* Java
* any IDE (devonfw-ide supports Eclipse, Intellij and VScode)
* Docker 

We recommend installing the devonfw-ide with the tools, but if you already got your system configured and the tools from above installed you can skip to xref:bootstrap-a-quarkus-project[Bootstrap a Quarkus Project] otherwise we will show you how to setup and update your devonfw-ide.

.devonfw-ide 
. Install devonfw-ide + 
Follow the https://github.com/devonfw/ide/wiki/setup#setup[Setup] to install the devonfw-ide with Java, Maven, Eclipse and VScode. 

.. Command to install Docker + 
`devon docker setup`

. Update devonfw-ide +
We advise to update your already installed devonfw-ide and all tools because we are still working to improve devonfw-ide and there could be essential features for cloud development with Quarkus that you could be missing. 

Use the commands `devon ide update`, `devon ide update software` and `devon ide scripts` to update devonfw-ide and all software that is installed.

Go to the main folder under workspaces of the devonfw-ide installation. 
We will create the project there.

== Bootstrap a Quarkus Project

Quarkus provides multiple ways to bootstrap a project.
The option to bootstrap a project via the command-line will be shown in the Quarkus getting started guide https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started#bootstrapping-the-project[Bootstrap the project].
Quarkus also provides a project builder where you can select some extensions, the build tool for your project, and if you want some starter code.
This will deliver a project skeleton with the configured project dependencies and also contributes the information to compile the application natively. To get some recommendations on starter templates follow this guide xref:guide-template.adoc[templates recommendations].

[NOTE]
====
By creating a Quarkus project from command-line or with the project builder you get a different project structure and have to adapt it to the devon4j conventions shown in the next Chapter.
====

=== Project Structure

We provide a recommendation and guideline for a link:../guide-structure-modern.adoc[modern project structure] to help organize your project into logically related modules.
You should follow the guide and also it in your project so you structure the project to the needs of modern cloud development and microservice architectures and also find similar modules faster in our example projects.


== Introduction to Quarkus Functionality
Before we start programming you should have a first look at the functionality of Quarkus.

.Quarkus functionality guides
. https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started[Getting started guide from Quarkus] + 
The guide is a good functionality overview, it shows with a simple **Greeting Service** a brief introduction into the concepts like CDI, testing, dev mode, packaging and running the app.  
. From Spring to Quarkus +
For experienced Spring developers that have already followed devon4j guidelines, you can read our guide to xref:getting-started-for-spring-developers.adoc[getting started with Quarkus for Spring developer], as it goes more into the differences that can give you a more detailed comparison to Spring.
.. Migrate a Spring app to Quarkus + 
This guide shows, how to link:../guide-migration-spring-quarkus.adoc[migrate a Spring application to a Quarkus application with devon4j conventions]. 


== Create a REST service
Now let's create our first REST CRUD service with Quarkus. 
We give you the options to use a guide and start to code the service yourself,
or just download a service that's ready to use. 


.Options
. Create the service yourself +
There is a good Quarkus guide for a simple https://quarkus.io/guides/rest-json#creating-your-first-json-rest-service[JSON REST service] that will guide you through your first application and will help you to implement defining endpoint with JAX-RS and an Entity that will be managed by the service and also how to https://quarkus.io/guides/rest-json#json[configure the JSON support].
. Use an existing Quarkus project + 
You don't want to code a service and just want to test some Quarkus functionalities? Just load a Quarkus https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts#quick-start-list[sample project], provided for every existing quick start guide and the supported framework.
Our Team also provides some Quarkus applications that are working and can be loaded and tested. 
* https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-reference[reference project] is a service that manages products. It contains the devon4j modern project structure, pagination, queries, a Postgres database, Jaeger tracing, Prometheus monitoring, SwaggerUI and support for Kubernetes deploy. 
This project will be steadily improved and is used to showcase the abilities of Quarkus with devon4j.
* https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-minimal[minimal Quarkus project] is just the Quarkus project from a https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started[getting started with Quarkus] guide with a **Greeting Services** modified with the correct modern structure talked about in this chapter xref:project-structure[Project Structure]



== OpenAPI generation 

We provide a guide with a short introduction to the link:../guide-openaoi.adoc[OpenAPI specification] with two plugins that are important in a Quarkus Context.

1. link:../guide-openaoi.adoc#smallrye-openapi[Smallrye Openapi supported by quarkus] 
2. link:../guide-openaoi.adoc#servicedocgen-maven-plugin[servicedocgen Maven Plugin].

A more detailed usage guide to the Smallrye Plugin is provided by https://quarkus.io/guides/openapi-swaggerui[Quarkus OpenAPI and Swagger guide].


== How to Integrate a Database
The next step for our REST service would be to integrate a database to store the objects of the entity. 

With Quarkus, adding a database can be easy, because Quarkus can take over the build-up and connection process.
First, you should understand our guides to the concepts of how to work with data and then we will show how to integrate a database with Quarkus.

.Data Principles Guides
. General devon4j JPA guide + 
To get an insight into the general JPA usage you should read the link:../guide-jpa.adoc[JPA guide] which contains a general explanation of the Java Persistence API.
. Difference to SpringData + 
If you have already worked with SpringData this is also partially supported with Quarkus, this is explained in more detail in this link:../guide-repository.adoc[SpringData Guide].


.Database Integration 
. Quarkus zero config dev mode + 
Starting with database implementation in Quarkus, we recommend for beginners to use the https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#dev-services[DEV mode Zero Config Setup (Dev Services)] this is especially great for testing the code without a database set up. 
Quarkus does all the work for you and configures a database and creates the database and tables(schemas) for you.
.. Configuration Properties + 
A list of all database configuration properties for the https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#configuring-dev-services[Dev services]
. Integrate a simple Hibernate ORM database + 
The zero config setup only works with the Dev mode, it's comfortable in the first phases of the creation of your service but if the goal is to also get a deployable version, you have to create your own database and integrate it.
This Quarkus guide shows, how to integrate a https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm[Hibernate ORM database] with an example service.
.. Configuration list for JDBC + 
A list of all configuration that is possible with a https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#jdbc-configuration[JDBC configuration properties]
. Reactive CRUD application with Panache + 
Quarkus unifies reactive and imperative programming.
Reactive is an architectural principle to build robust, efficient, and concurrent applications. 
An introduction into reactive and how Quarkus is enabling it follow this https://quarkus.io/guides/quarkus-reactive-architecture[Quarkus reactive architecture] article and also the https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-reactive[reactive quickstart].
To get started with reactive and implement reactive methods you can follow the https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-reactive-panache[Quarkus reactive guide].
The reactive guide is using the Quarkus based implementation of a Hibernate ORM called Panache. 
That implementation is not our first choice with devon4j and therefore not part of our recommendations, but to understand the reactive guide you can read the https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm-panache[Hibernate ORM with Panache guide] first to prevent possible problems following the guide.

[NOTE]
====
You need an installed Docker version for the https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#dev-services[zero config setup].
==== 


.Database Migration
. Migration guide
For schema-based databases, we recommend migrating databases with Flyway.
In that case there is our link:../guide-database-migration.adoc[general migration guide] can give you an overview if you are not familiar with migration.
.. Flyway guide for Quarkus
This Quarkus guide will show how to work with the https://quarkus.io/guides/flyway[Flyway extension in a Quarkus application].
This should be used if you start your own database and do not leave the creation to quarkus.


== Testing a Quarkus Application 
After we have built the service, we have to verify it with some tests.
We will give you some guidelines to implement some test cases.

.Testing Guides 
. General testing guide + 
For users that aren't familiar with the devon4j testing principles, we created a general link:../guide-testing.adoc[best practices and recommendations guide for testing].
.. Our guide for testing with Quarkus
In addition, we also provide a guide that specifically addresses the xref:guide-for-testing.adoc[testing of a Quarkus application].
  
Most of the Quarkus applications are already equipped with a basic Test and also our https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-reference[reference project] provides some test cases, if you want to improve and extends the tests, you can also follow the large https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing[Quarkus guide for testing]. 



== Packaging of a Quarkus application and creation of a native executable
Quarkus applications can be packed into different types. The following link will show how to build and also give you a short explanation of the characteristics of these files.

.Package types
. https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#fast-jar[fast-jar]
. https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#remote-development-mode[mutable-jar]
. https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#uber-jar-maven[uber-jar]
. xref:guide-native-image.adoc[native executable]

To pack an application use the command `mvn package` and Quarkus will generate the output in the **/target** folder. For the native executables, the command needs more parameters but this is explained in the link above.

Configure the Output with these https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#configuration-reference[configuration properties]


== Create and build a Docker Image

Quarkus supports Jib, S2I and https://www.docker.com/[Docker] for building images. We focus on building a Quarkus App with Docker.
You get a created Dockerfile from Quarkus in the src/main/docker folder of any project generated from Quarkus. There are multiple Dockerfiles.

.Dockerfiles
. Dockerfile.jvm + 
Dockerfile for Quarkus application in the JVM mode. running in **Red Hat Universal Base Image 8 Minimal Container**
. Dockerfile.legacy-jar + 
DockerFile for Quarkus application in JVM mode with the legacy jar **running in Red Hat Universal Base Image 8 Minimal Container**.
. Dockerfile.native + 
Dockerfile using the native executable running in **Red Hat Universal Base Image 8 Minimal container**.
. Dockerfile.native-distroless
The native file will run in a **Distroless container**. Distroless images are very small containers with just the application and runtime dependencies and without the other programs coming with a Linux distribution.

[Note]
====
For more information to the different executables go back to the chapter xref:packaging-of-a-quarkus-application-and-creation-of-a-native-executable[Packaging of a Quarkus application and creation of a native executable]
====
To simply build and run a Docker image you can follow the instructions Quarkus provides for every Dockerfile in the comments block. 

Docker commands example for the from the JVM Dockerfile from our https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-reference[reference project]

----
####
# This Dockerfile is used in order to build a container that runs the Quarkus application in JVM mode
#
# Before building the container image run:
#
# ./mvnw package
#
# Then, build the image with:
#
# docker build -f src/main/docker/Dockerfile.jvm -t quarkus/quarkus-basics-jvm .
#
# Then run the container using:
#
# docker run -i --rm -p 8080:8080 quarkus/quarkus-basics-jvm
#
# If you want to include the debug port into your docker image
# you will have to expose the debug port (default 5005) like this :  EXPOSE 8080 5050
#
# Then run the container using :
#
# docker run -i --rm -p 8080:8080 -p 5005:5005 -e JAVA_ENABLE_DEBUG="true" quarkus/quarkus-basics-jvm
#
###
----

Quarkus is also able to build the image while packaging the application so you don't have to execute the command from above. 
To perform Docker builds with the generated Dockerfiles from above you need to add the following extension to your project with the command `mvn quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="container-image-docker"`.

Also you have to set the **quarkus.container-image.build=true**, you can add this to your **application.properties** or just append it to the packaging command like that `./mvn package -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true`.


If your needs exceed the instructions given by the file, we recommend to follow the Docker https://docs.docker.com/get-started/[getting started guide] to get familiar with Docker and customize the Dockerfiles according to your needs.
To specify your container build, you can use the https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image#container-image-options[general container image configurations properties] and the https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image#docker-options[Docker image configurations properties] when building and runnig Docker images.

Commit message:

replaced link: with xref: for link:../ instances

modules/ROOT/pages/quarkus/getting-started-quarkus.adoc, after:

== Quarkus Quickstart 

This guide will show a quickstart how to create a Quarkus app and will briefly show the key functionalities that Quarkus provides and how to start as a beginner or also experienced developers.


== Introduction to Quarkus 

To get the first introduction to Quarkus you can read the xref:../quarkus.adoc[Quarkus introduction guide]. To get a short overview where you can find the important Quarkus related guides follow the chapter xref:../quarkus.adoc#guide-to-the-reader[guide to the reader].
Also, a comparison of the xref:../quarkus.adoc#Pros[advantages] and xref:../quarkus.adoc#cons[disadvantages] of a Quarkus application compared to the alternative framework Spring.
This comparison will be supported by our xref:../performance-comparison-spring-quarkus.adoc[performance comparison between Spring and Quarkus] that shows the lower resource consumption and startup time of Quarkus applications.


== Installation of Tools and Dependencies

First, we need to install some dependencies and tools before we can start programming. Our tool https://devonfw.com/website/pages/docs/devonfw-ide-introduction.asciidoc.html[devonfw-ide] comes with many development tools for you.
We need to install the following tools for this guide.


* Maven 
* Java
* any IDE (devonfw-ide supports Eclipse, Intellij and VScode)
* Docker 

We recommend installing the devonfw-ide with the tools, but if you already got your system configured and the tools from above installed you can skip to xref:bootstrap-a-quarkus-project[Bootstrap a Quarkus Project] otherwise we will show you how to setup and update your devonfw-ide.

.devonfw-ide 
. Install devonfw-ide + 
Follow the https://github.com/devonfw/ide/wiki/setup#setup[Setup] to install the devonfw-ide with Java, Maven, Eclipse and VScode. 

.. Command to install Docker + 
`devon docker setup`

. Update devonfw-ide +
We advise to update your already installed devonfw-ide and all tools because we are still working to improve devonfw-ide and there could be essential features for cloud development with Quarkus that you could be missing. 

Use the commands `devon ide update`, `devon ide update software` and `devon ide scripts` to update devonfw-ide and all software that is installed.

Go to the main folder under workspaces of the devonfw-ide installation. 
We will create the project there.

== Bootstrap a Quarkus Project

Quarkus provides multiple ways to bootstrap a project.
The option to bootstrap a project via the command-line will be shown in the Quarkus getting started guide https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started#bootstrapping-the-project[Bootstrap the project].
Quarkus also provides a project builder where you can select some extensions, the build tool for your project, and if you want some starter code.
This will deliver a project skeleton with the configured project dependencies and also contributes the information to compile the application natively. To get some recommendations on starter templates follow this guide xref:guide-template.adoc[templates recommendations].

[NOTE]
====
By creating a Quarkus project from command-line or with the project builder you get a different project structure and have to adapt it to the devon4j conventions shown in the next Chapter.
====

=== Project Structure

We provide a recommendation and guideline for a xref:../guide-structure-modern.adoc[modern project structure] to help organize your project into logically related modules.
You should follow the guide and also it in your project so you structure the project to the needs of modern cloud development and microservice architectures and also find similar modules faster in our example projects.


== Introduction to Quarkus Functionality
Before we start programming you should have a first look at the functionality of Quarkus.

.Quarkus functionality guides
. https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started[Getting started guide from Quarkus] + 
The guide is a good functionality overview, it shows with a simple **Greeting Service** a brief introduction into the concepts like CDI, testing, dev mode, packaging and running the app.  
. From Spring to Quarkus +
For experienced Spring developers that have already followed devon4j guidelines, you can read our guide to xref:getting-started-for-spring-developers.adoc[getting started with Quarkus for Spring developer], as it goes more into the differences that can give you a more detailed comparison to Spring.
.. Migrate a Spring app to Quarkus + 
This guide shows, how to xref:../guide-migration-spring-quarkus.adoc[migrate a Spring application to a Quarkus application with devon4j conventions]. 


== Create a REST service
Now let's create our first REST CRUD service with Quarkus. 
We give you the options to use a guide and start to code the service yourself,
or just download a service that's ready to use. 


.Options
. Create the service yourself +
There is a good Quarkus guide for a simple https://quarkus.io/guides/rest-json#creating-your-first-json-rest-service[JSON REST service] that will guide you through your first application and will help you to implement defining endpoint with JAX-RS and an Entity that will be managed by the service and also how to https://quarkus.io/guides/rest-json#json[configure the JSON support].
. Use an existing Quarkus project + 
You don't want to code a service and just want to test some Quarkus functionalities? Just load a Quarkus https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts#quick-start-list[sample project], provided for every existing quick start guide and the supported framework.
Our Team also provides some Quarkus applications that are working and can be loaded and tested. 
* https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-reference[reference project] is a service that manages products. It contains the devon4j modern project structure, pagination, queries, a Postgres database, Jaeger tracing, Prometheus monitoring, SwaggerUI and support for Kubernetes deploy. 
This project will be steadily improved and is used to showcase the abilities of Quarkus with devon4j.
* https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-minimal[minimal Quarkus project] is just the Quarkus project from a https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started[getting started with Quarkus] guide with a **Greeting Services** modified with the correct modern structure talked about in this chapter xref:project-structure[Project Structure]



== OpenAPI generation 

We provide a guide with a short introduction to the xref:../guide-openaoi.adoc[OpenAPI specification] with two plugins that are important in a Quarkus Context.

1. xref:../guide-openaoi.adoc#smallrye-openapi[Smallrye Openapi supported by quarkus] 
2. xref:../guide-openaoi.adoc#servicedocgen-maven-plugin[servicedocgen Maven Plugin].

A more detailed usage guide to the Smallrye Plugin is provided by https://quarkus.io/guides/openapi-swaggerui[Quarkus OpenAPI and Swagger guide].


== How to Integrate a Database
The next step for our REST service would be to integrate a database to store the objects of the entity. 

With Quarkus, adding a database can be easy, because Quarkus can take over the build-up and connection process.
First, you should understand our guides to the concepts of how to work with data and then we will show how to integrate a database with Quarkus.

.Data Principles Guides
. General devon4j JPA guide + 
To get an insight into the general JPA usage you should read the xref:../guide-jpa.adoc[JPA guide] which contains a general explanation of the Java Persistence API.
. Difference to SpringData + 
If you have already worked with SpringData this is also partially supported with Quarkus, this is explained in more detail in this xref:../guide-repository.adoc[SpringData Guide].


.Database Integration 
. Quarkus zero config dev mode + 
Starting with database implementation in Quarkus, we recommend for beginners to use the https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#dev-services[DEV mode Zero Config Setup (Dev Services)] this is especially great for testing the code without a database set up. 
Quarkus does all the work for you and configures a database and creates the database and tables(schemas) for you.
.. Configuration Properties + 
A list of all database configuration properties for the https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#configuring-dev-services[Dev services]
. Integrate a simple Hibernate ORM database + 
The zero config setup only works with the Dev mode, it's comfortable in the first phases of the creation of your service but if the goal is to also get a deployable version, you have to create your own database and integrate it.
This Quarkus guide shows, how to integrate a https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm[Hibernate ORM database] with an example service.
.. Configuration list for JDBC + 
A list of all configuration that is possible with a https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#jdbc-configuration[JDBC configuration properties]
. Reactive CRUD application with Panache + 
Quarkus unifies reactive and imperative programming.
Reactive is an architectural principle to build robust, efficient, and concurrent applications. 
An introduction into reactive and how Quarkus is enabling it follow this https://quarkus.io/guides/quarkus-reactive-architecture[Quarkus reactive architecture] article and also the https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-reactive[reactive quickstart].
To get started with reactive and implement reactive methods you can follow the https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-reactive-panache[Quarkus reactive guide].
The reactive guide is using the Quarkus based implementation of a Hibernate ORM called Panache. 
That implementation is not our first choice with devon4j and therefore not part of our recommendations, but to understand the reactive guide you can read the https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm-panache[Hibernate ORM with Panache guide] first to prevent possible problems following the guide.

[NOTE]
====
You need an installed Docker version for the https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource#dev-services[zero config setup].
==== 


.Database Migration
. Migration guide
For schema-based databases, we recommend migrating databases with Flyway.
In that case there is our xref:../guide-database-migration.adoc[general migration guide] can give you an overview if you are not familiar with migration.
.. Flyway guide for Quarkus
This Quarkus guide will show how to work with the https://quarkus.io/guides/flyway[Flyway extension in a Quarkus application].
This should be used if you start your own database and do not leave the creation to quarkus.


== Testing a Quarkus Application 
After we have built the service, we have to verify it with some tests.
We will give you some guidelines to implement some test cases.

.Testing Guides 
. General testing guide + 
For users that aren't familiar with the devon4j testing principles, we created a general xref:../guide-testing.adoc[best practices and recommendations guide for testing].
.. Our guide for testing with Quarkus
In addition, we also provide a guide that specifically addresses the xref:guide-for-testing.adoc[testing of a Quarkus application].
  
Most of the Quarkus applications are already equipped with a basic Test and also our https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-reference[reference project] provides some test cases, if you want to improve and extends the tests, you can also follow the large https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing[Quarkus guide for testing]. 



== Packaging of a Quarkus application and creation of a native executable
Quarkus applications can be packed into different types. The following link will show how to build and also give you a short explanation of the characteristics of these files.

.Package types
. https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#fast-jar[fast-jar]
. https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#remote-development-mode[mutable-jar]
. https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#uber-jar-maven[uber-jar]
. xref:guide-native-image.adoc[native executable]

To pack an application use the command `mvn package` and Quarkus will generate the output in the **/target** folder. For the native executables, the command needs more parameters but this is explained in the link above.

Configure the Output with these https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#configuration-reference[configuration properties]


== Create and build a Docker Image

Quarkus supports Jib, S2I and https://www.docker.com/[Docker] for building images. We focus on building a Quarkus App with Docker.
You get a created Dockerfile from Quarkus in the src/main/docker folder of any project generated from Quarkus. There are multiple Dockerfiles.

.Dockerfiles
. Dockerfile.jvm + 
Dockerfile for Quarkus application in the JVM mode. running in **Red Hat Universal Base Image 8 Minimal Container**
. Dockerfile.legacy-jar + 
DockerFile for Quarkus application in JVM mode with the legacy jar **running in Red Hat Universal Base Image 8 Minimal Container**.
. Dockerfile.native + 
Dockerfile using the native executable running in **Red Hat Universal Base Image 8 Minimal container**.
. Dockerfile.native-distroless
The native file will run in a **Distroless container**. Distroless images are very small containers with just the application and runtime dependencies and without the other programs coming with a Linux distribution.

[Note]
====
For more information to the different executables go back to the chapter xref:packaging-of-a-quarkus-application-and-creation-of-a-native-executable[Packaging of a Quarkus application and creation of a native executable]
====
To simply build and run a Docker image you can follow the instructions Quarkus provides for every Dockerfile in the comments block. 

Docker commands example for the from the JVM Dockerfile from our https://github.com/devonfw-sample/devon4quarkus-reference[reference project]

----
####
# This Dockerfile is used in order to build a container that runs the Quarkus application in JVM mode
#
# Before building the container image run:
#
# ./mvnw package
#
# Then, build the image with:
#
# docker build -f src/main/docker/Dockerfile.jvm -t quarkus/quarkus-basics-jvm .
#
# Then run the container using:
#
# docker run -i --rm -p 8080:8080 quarkus/quarkus-basics-jvm
#
# If you want to include the debug port into your docker image
# you will have to expose the debug port (default 5005) like this :  EXPOSE 8080 5050
#
# Then run the container using :
#
# docker run -i --rm -p 8080:8080 -p 5005:5005 -e JAVA_ENABLE_DEBUG="true" quarkus/quarkus-basics-jvm
#
###
----

Quarkus is also able to build the image while packaging the application so you don't have to execute the command from above. 
To perform Docker builds with the generated Dockerfiles from above you need to add the following extension to your project with the command `mvn quarkus:add-extension -Dextensions="container-image-docker"`.

Also you have to set the **quarkus.container-image.build=true**, you can add this to your **application.properties** or just append it to the packaging command like that `./mvn package -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true`.


If your needs exceed the instructions given by the file, we recommend to follow the Docker https://docs.docker.com/get-started/[getting started guide] to get familiar with Docker and customize the Dockerfiles according to your needs.
To specify your container build, you can use the https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image#container-image-options[general container image configurations properties] and the https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image#docker-options[Docker image configurations properties] when building and runnig Docker images.
