modules/ROOT/pages/guide-jms.adoc, before:

:toc: macro
toc::[]

== Messaging

Messaging in Java is done using the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Message_Service[JMS] standard from JEE.

== Products
For messaging you need to choose a JMS provider such as:

* https://www.rabbitmq.com/[RabbitMQ]
* https://activemq.apache.org[ActiveMQ]
* link:guide-oracle.adoc#messaging[Oracle Advanced Queuing] (esp. if you already use link:guide-oracle.adoc[Oracle RDBMS])

== Receiver
As a receiver of messages is receiving data from other systems it is located in the link:guide-service-layer.adoc[service-layer].

=== JMS Listener
A `JmsListener` is a class listening and consuming JMS messages. It should carry the suffix `JmsListener` and implement the `MessageListener` interface or have its listener method annotated with `@JmsListener`. This is illustrated by the following example:

[source,java]
----
@Named
@Transactional
public class BookingJmsListener /* implements MessageListener */ {

  @Inject
  private Bookingmanagement bookingmanagement;

  @Inject
  private MessageConverter messageConverter;

  @JmsListener(destination = "BOOKING_QUEUE", containerFactory = "jmsListenerContainerFactory")
  public void onMessage(Message message) {
    try {
      BookingTo bookingTo = (BookingTo) this.messageConverter.fromMessage(message);
      this.bookingmanagement.importBooking(bookingTo);
    } catch (MessageConversionException | JMSException e) {
      throw new InvalidMessageException(message);
    }
  }
}
----

== Sender

The sending of JMS messages is considered as any other sending of data like link:guide-kafka.adoc[kafka] messages or RPC calls via link:guide-rest.adoc[REST] using link:guide-service-client.adoc[service-client], gRPC, etc.
This will typically happen directly from a link:guide-usecase.adoc[use-case] in the link:guide-logic-layer.adoc[logic-layer].
However, the technical complexity of the communication and protocols itself shall be hidden from the use-case and not be part of the logic layer.
With spring we can simply use https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/jms/core/JmsTemplate.html[JmsTemplate] to do that.

Commit message:

replaced every instance of link:xyz.adoc with xref --fixed

modules/ROOT/pages/guide-jms.adoc, after:

:toc: macro
toc::[]

== Messaging

Messaging in Java is done using the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Message_Service[JMS] standard from JEE.

== Products
For messaging you need to choose a JMS provider such as:

* https://www.rabbitmq.com/[RabbitMQ]
* https://activemq.apache.org[ActiveMQ]
* xref:guide-oracle.adoc#messaging[Oracle Advanced Queuing] (esp. if you already use xref:guide-oracle.adoc[Oracle RDBMS])

== Receiver
As a receiver of messages is receiving data from other systems it is located in the xref:guide-service-layer.adoc[service-layer].

=== JMS Listener
A `JmsListener` is a class listening and consuming JMS messages. It should carry the suffix `JmsListener` and implement the `MessageListener` interface or have its listener method annotated with `@JmsListener`. This is illustrated by the following example:

[source,java]
----
@Named
@Transactional
public class BookingJmsListener /* implements MessageListener */ {

  @Inject
  private Bookingmanagement bookingmanagement;

  @Inject
  private MessageConverter messageConverter;

  @JmsListener(destination = "BOOKING_QUEUE", containerFactory = "jmsListenerContainerFactory")
  public void onMessage(Message message) {
    try {
      BookingTo bookingTo = (BookingTo) this.messageConverter.fromMessage(message);
      this.bookingmanagement.importBooking(bookingTo);
    } catch (MessageConversionException | JMSException e) {
      throw new InvalidMessageException(message);
    }
  }
}
----

== Sender

The sending of JMS messages is considered as any other sending of data like xref:guide-kafka.adoc[kafka] messages or RPC calls via xref:guide-rest.adoc[REST] using xref:guide-service-client.adoc[service-client], gRPC, etc.
This will typically happen directly from a xref:guide-usecase.adoc[use-case] in the xref:guide-logic-layer.adoc[logic-layer].
However, the technical complexity of the communication and protocols itself shall be hidden from the use-case and not be part of the logic layer.
With spring we can simply use https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/jms/core/JmsTemplate.html[JmsTemplate] to do that.
