modules/ROOT/pages/guide-transferobject.adoc, before:

:toc: macro
toc::[]
== Transfer-Objects

The technical data model is defined in form of link:guide-jpa.adoc#entity[persistent entities].
However, passing persistent entities via _call-by-reference_ across the entire application will soon cause problems:

* Changes to a persistent entity are directly written back to the persistent store when the transaction is committed. When the entity is send across the application also changes tend to take place in multiple places endangering data sovereignty and leading to inconsistency.
* You want to send and receive data via services across the network and have to define what section of your data is actually transferred. If you have relations in your technical model you quickly end up loading and transferring way too much data.
* Modifications to your technical data model shall not automatically have impact on your external services causing incompatibilities.

To prevent such problems transfer-objects are used leading to a _call-by-value_ model and decoupling changes to persistent entities.

In the following sections the different types of transfer-objects are explained.
You will find all according naming-conventions in the link:guide-structure-classic.adoc#architecture-mapping[architecture-mapping]

To structure your transfer objects, we recommend the following approaches:

    * link:guide-eto-cto.adoc[ETO and CTO]
    * link:guide-dto.adoc[DTO]

Also considering the following transfer objects in specific cases:

SearchCriteriaTo::
For searching we create or generate a `«BusinessObject»SearchCriteriaTo` representing a query to find instances of `«BusinessObject»`.

TO::
There are typically transfer-objects for data that is never persistent.
For very generic cases these just carry the suffix `To`.

STO::
We can potentially create separate _service transfer objects_ (STO) (if possible named `«BusinessObject»Sto`) to keep the link:guide-service-layer.adoc[service] API stable and independent of the actual data-model.
However, we usually do not need this and want to keep our architecture simple.
Only create STOs if you need link:guide-service-layer.adoc#versioning[service versioning] and support previous APIs or to provide legacy service technologies that require their own isolated data-model.
In such case you also need link:guide-beanmapping.adoc[beanmapping] between STOs and ETOs/DTOs what means extra effort and complexity that should be avoided.

Commit message:

replaced every instance of link:xyz.adoc with xref --fixed

modules/ROOT/pages/guide-transferobject.adoc, after:

:toc: macro
toc::[]
== Transfer-Objects

The technical data model is defined in form of xref:guide-jpa.adoc#entity[persistent entities].
However, passing persistent entities via _call-by-reference_ across the entire application will soon cause problems:

* Changes to a persistent entity are directly written back to the persistent store when the transaction is committed. When the entity is send across the application also changes tend to take place in multiple places endangering data sovereignty and leading to inconsistency.
* You want to send and receive data via services across the network and have to define what section of your data is actually transferred. If you have relations in your technical model you quickly end up loading and transferring way too much data.
* Modifications to your technical data model shall not automatically have impact on your external services causing incompatibilities.

To prevent such problems transfer-objects are used leading to a _call-by-value_ model and decoupling changes to persistent entities.

In the following sections the different types of transfer-objects are explained.
You will find all according naming-conventions in the xref:guide-structure-classic.adoc#architecture-mapping[architecture-mapping]

To structure your transfer objects, we recommend the following approaches:

    * xref:guide-eto-cto.adoc[ETO and CTO]
    * xref:guide-dto.adoc[DTO]

Also considering the following transfer objects in specific cases:

SearchCriteriaTo::
For searching we create or generate a `«BusinessObject»SearchCriteriaTo` representing a query to find instances of `«BusinessObject»`.

TO::
There are typically transfer-objects for data that is never persistent.
For very generic cases these just carry the suffix `To`.

STO::
We can potentially create separate _service transfer objects_ (STO) (if possible named `«BusinessObject»Sto`) to keep the xref:guide-service-layer.adoc[service] API stable and independent of the actual data-model.
However, we usually do not need this and want to keep our architecture simple.
Only create STOs if you need xref:guide-service-layer.adoc#versioning[service versioning] and support previous APIs or to provide legacy service technologies that require their own isolated data-model.
In such case you also need xref:guide-beanmapping.adoc[beanmapping] between STOs and ETOs/DTOs what means extra effort and complexity that should be avoided.
