modules/ROOT/pages/guide-migration-spring-quarkus.adoc, before:

:toc: macro
toc::[]

== Migrate from Spring to Quarkus

This guide will cover the migration process of a Spring application to a Quarkus application. There are already articles about migrating from Spring to Quarkus (e.g. https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2020/04/10/migrating-a-spring-boot-microservices-application-to-quarkus, https://dzone.com/articles/migrating-a-spring-boot-application-to-quarkus-cha).
This guide will focus more on the devon4j specific aspects. We assume that a working Spring application exists, built in the link:guide-structure-classic.adoc[classic devon4j specific way] (e.g. https://github.com/devonfw/jump-the-queue/tree/master/java/jtqj[Jump The Queue] or https://github.com/devonfw/my-thai-star[My Thai Star]).

== Create the Quarkus application

We start with an empty Quarkus project. You can create the project with Maven on the command line or use the https://code.quarkus.io/[online generator]. The advantage of the online generator is that you have a pre-selection of dependencies to use in your project.
For starters, let's select the basic dependencies needed to develop a REST service with database connectivity (you can use one of the links in the link:quarkus/quarkus-template.adoc[Quarkus template guide]): __RESTEasy JAX-RS, RESTEasy Jackson, Hibernate ORM, Spring Data JPA API, JDBC Driver (choose the type of database you need), Flyway (if you have database migration schemas), SmallRye Health (optional for Health Monitoring)__

The list does not include all required dependencies. We will add more dependencies to the project later. So for now generate the application with these dependencies.

=== Migration Toolkit from Red Hat
Red Hat provides a migration toolkit (https://developers.redhat.com/products/mta/overview[MTA, Migration Toolkit for Applications]), that supports you migrating a Spring application to a Quarkus application. There are several versions of this toolkit (e.g., a web console, a Maven plugin, or an IDE plugin).
The MTA analyzes your existing application and generates a report with hints and instructions for migrating from Spring to Quarkus. For example, it gives you an indication of which dependencies are not supported in your project for a Quarkus application and which dependencies you need to swap them with. The analysis is rule-based, and you can also add your own rules that will be checked during analysis.

== Entities

There is nothing special to consider when creating the entities. In most cases, you can simply take the code from your Spring application and use it for your Quarkus application. Usually, the entities extend a superclass `ApplicationPersistenceEntity` containing for example the `id` property. You can also take this class from your Spring application and reuse it.

== Transfer objects

The next step is to create the appropriate transfer objects for the entities. In a devon4j Spring application, we would use CobiGen to create these classes. Since CobiGen is not usable for this purpose in Quarkus applications yet, we have to create the classes manually.

First we create some abstract base classes for the search criteria and DTO classes. Normally these would also be created by CobiGen.

.**AbstractSearchCriteriaTo**
[source,java]
----
public abstract class AbstractSearchCriteriaTo extends AbstractTo {

  private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;

  private Pageable pageable;

  //getter + setter for pageable
}
----

.**AbstractDto**
[source,java]
----
public abstract class AbstractDto extends AbstractTo {

  private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;

  private Long id;

  private int modificationCounter;

  public AbstractDto() {

    super();
  }

  //getter + setter

  @Override
  protected void toString(StringBuilder buffer) {
    ...
  }
}
----

The class `AbstractTo`, the other classes extend, would be provided by the https://github.com/devonfw/devon4j/tree/master/modules/basic[`devon4j-basic`] module in a devon4j Spring application. You can take the code from link:https://github.com/devonfw/devon4j/blob/master/modules/basic/src/main/java/com/devonfw/module/basic/common/api/to/AbstractTo.java[here] and reuse it in your Quarkus project.

Now you can create your transfer objects. Most of the code of the transfer objects of your Spring application should be reusable. For Quarkus, we recommend (as mentioned link:guide-dto.adoc[here]) to use `*Dto` instead of `*Eto` classes. So be sure to change the names of the classes accordingly.

== Data Access Layer

In devon4j, we propose to use link:guide-repository.adoc[Spring Data JPA] to build the data access layer using repositories and QueryDSL to build link:guide-jpa-query.adoc#dynamic-queries[dynamic queries]. We will also use this approach for Quarkus applications, but we need to change the implementation because the devon4j modules are based on reflection, which is not suitable for Quarkus.
In Quarkus we will use Querydsl using code generation. So for this layer, more changes are required and we can't just take the existing code.

First, create a repository interface for your entity class that extends `JpaRepository` (see link:guide-repository.adoc#repository[here]).

To add QueryDSL support to your project, add the following dependencies to your pom.xml file:

.**pom.xml**
[source,xml]
--------
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.querydsl</groupId>
  <artifactId>querydsl-jpa</artifactId>
  <version>4.3.1</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.querydsl</groupId>
  <artifactId>querydsl-apt</artifactId>
  <scope>provided</scope>
  <version>4.3.1</version>
</dependency>
--------

As mentioned above, we will use QueryDSL with code generation. For this, add the QueryDSL annotation processor to your plugins:

.**pom.xml**
[source,xml]
--------
<plugins>
...
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mysema.maven</groupId>
    <artifactId>apt-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>1.1.3</version>
    <executions>
      <execution>
        <phase>generate-sources</phase>
        <goals>
          <goal>process</goal>
        </goals>
        <configuration>
          <outputDirectory>target/generated-sources/annotations</outputDirectory>
          <processor>com.querydsl.apt.jpa.JPAAnnotationProcessor</processor>
        </configuration>
      </execution>
    </executions>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
--------

To implement the queries, follow the link:guide-jpa-query.adoc#dynamic-queries[corresponding guide].

Set the following properties in the application.properties file to configure the connection to your database (see also link:quarkus/guide-quarkus-configuration.adoc#database-configuration[here]):

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.db-kind=...
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=...
quarkus.datasource.username=...
quarkus.datasource.password=...
----

== Logic Layer

For the logic layer, devon4j uses a link:guide-usecase.adoc[use-case approach]. You can reuse the use case interfaces from the api module of the Spring application. Again, make sure to rename the transfer objects.

Create the appropriate class that implements the interface. Follow the link:guide-usecase.adoc#implementation[implementation section] of the use-case guide to implement the methods. For mapping the entities to the corresponding transfer objects, see the next section.

== Mapping

For bean mapping, we need to use a completely different approach in the Quarkus application than in the Spring application. For Quarkus, we use MapStruct, which creates the mapper at build time rather than at runtime using reflection. Add the following dependencies to your pom.xml.

.**pom.xml**
[source,xml]
--------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.mapstruct</groupId>
  <artifactId>mapstruct-processor</artifactId>
  <version>1.4.2.Final</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.mapstruct</groupId>
  <artifactId>mapstruct</artifactId>
  <version>1.4.2.Final</version>
</dependency>
--------

Then you can create the mapper as follows:

.**Mapper**
[source,java]
----
@Mapper(componentModel = "cdi")
public interface YourEntityMapper {
  YourEntityDto map(YourEntity entity);

  YourEntity map(YourEntityDto dto);
  
  ...
}
----

Inject the mapper into your use-case implementation and simply use the methods. The method implementations of the mapper are created when the application is built.

== Service Layer

For the implementation of the service layer, we use the link:guide-rest#jax-rs[JAX-RS] for both Quarkus and Spring applications to create the REST services. Classic devon4j Spring applications rely on Apache CFX as the implemention of JAX-RS.
For Quarkus, we use RESTEasy. Since both are implementations of JAX-RS, much of the Spring application code can be reused.

Take the definition of the REST endpoints from the api module of the Spring application (make sure to rename the transfer objects), inject the use-cases from the logic layer and use them in the REST service methods as follows:

.**REST service**
[source,java]
----
@Path("/path/v1")
public class YourComponentRestService {

  @Inject
  UcFindYourEntity ucFindYourEntity;

  @Inject
  UcManageYourEntity ucManageYourEntity;

  @GET
  @Path("/yourEntity/{id}/")
  public YourEntityDto getYourEntity(@PathParam("id") long id);

    return this.ucFindYourEntity.findYourEntity(id);
  }

  ...
}
----

== Summary

As you have seen, some parts hardly differ when migrating a Spring application to a Quarkus application, while other parts differ more. The above sections describe the parts needed for simple applications that provide REST services with a data access layer.
If you add more functionality, more customization and other frameworks/dependencies may be required. If that is the case, take a look at the corresponding guide on the topic in the devon4j documentation or check if there is a tutorial on the official https://quarkus.io/guides/[Quarkus website].

Furthermore, we can summarize that migrating from a Spring application to a Quarkus representative is not complex. Although Quarkus is a very young framework (release 1.0 was in 2019), it brings a lot of proven standards and libraries that you can integrate into your application.
This makes it easy to migrate and reuse code from existing (Spring) applications. Also, Quarkus comes with Spring API compatibility for many Spring modules (https://quarkus.io/guides/spring-data-jpa[Spring Data JPA], https://quarkus.io/guides/spring-di[Spring DI], https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/extensions[etc.]), which makes it easier for developers to reuse their knowledge.

Commit message:

replaced every instance of link:xyz.adoc with xref --fixed

modules/ROOT/pages/guide-migration-spring-quarkus.adoc, after:

:toc: macro
toc::[]

== Migrate from Spring to Quarkus

This guide will cover the migration process of a Spring application to a Quarkus application. There are already articles about migrating from Spring to Quarkus (e.g. https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2020/04/10/migrating-a-spring-boot-microservices-application-to-quarkus, https://dzone.com/articles/migrating-a-spring-boot-application-to-quarkus-cha).
This guide will focus more on the devon4j specific aspects. We assume that a working Spring application exists, built in the xref:guide-structure-classic.adoc[classic devon4j specific way] (e.g. https://github.com/devonfw/jump-the-queue/tree/master/java/jtqj[Jump The Queue] or https://github.com/devonfw/my-thai-star[My Thai Star]).

== Create the Quarkus application

We start with an empty Quarkus project. You can create the project with Maven on the command line or use the https://code.quarkus.io/[online generator]. The advantage of the online generator is that you have a pre-selection of dependencies to use in your project.
For starters, let's select the basic dependencies needed to develop a REST service with database connectivity (you can use one of the links in the xref:quarkus/quarkus-template.adoc[Quarkus template guide]): __RESTEasy JAX-RS, RESTEasy Jackson, Hibernate ORM, Spring Data JPA API, JDBC Driver (choose the type of database you need), Flyway (if you have database migration schemas), SmallRye Health (optional for Health Monitoring)__

The list does not include all required dependencies. We will add more dependencies to the project later. So for now generate the application with these dependencies.

=== Migration Toolkit from Red Hat
Red Hat provides a migration toolkit (https://developers.redhat.com/products/mta/overview[MTA, Migration Toolkit for Applications]), that supports you migrating a Spring application to a Quarkus application. There are several versions of this toolkit (e.g., a web console, a Maven plugin, or an IDE plugin).
The MTA analyzes your existing application and generates a report with hints and instructions for migrating from Spring to Quarkus. For example, it gives you an indication of which dependencies are not supported in your project for a Quarkus application and which dependencies you need to swap them with. The analysis is rule-based, and you can also add your own rules that will be checked during analysis.

== Entities

There is nothing special to consider when creating the entities. In most cases, you can simply take the code from your Spring application and use it for your Quarkus application. Usually, the entities extend a superclass `ApplicationPersistenceEntity` containing for example the `id` property. You can also take this class from your Spring application and reuse it.

== Transfer objects

The next step is to create the appropriate transfer objects for the entities. In a devon4j Spring application, we would use CobiGen to create these classes. Since CobiGen is not usable for this purpose in Quarkus applications yet, we have to create the classes manually.

First we create some abstract base classes for the search criteria and DTO classes. Normally these would also be created by CobiGen.

.**AbstractSearchCriteriaTo**
[source,java]
----
public abstract class AbstractSearchCriteriaTo extends AbstractTo {

  private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;

  private Pageable pageable;

  //getter + setter for pageable
}
----

.**AbstractDto**
[source,java]
----
public abstract class AbstractDto extends AbstractTo {

  private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;

  private Long id;

  private int modificationCounter;

  public AbstractDto() {

    super();
  }

  //getter + setter

  @Override
  protected void toString(StringBuilder buffer) {
    ...
  }
}
----

The class `AbstractTo`, the other classes extend, would be provided by the https://github.com/devonfw/devon4j/tree/master/modules/basic[`devon4j-basic`] module in a devon4j Spring application. You can take the code from link:https://github.com/devonfw/devon4j/blob/master/modules/basic/src/main/java/com/devonfw/module/basic/common/api/to/AbstractTo.java[here] and reuse it in your Quarkus project.

Now you can create your transfer objects. Most of the code of the transfer objects of your Spring application should be reusable. For Quarkus, we recommend (as mentioned xref:guide-dto.adoc[here]) to use `*Dto` instead of `*Eto` classes. So be sure to change the names of the classes accordingly.

== Data Access Layer

In devon4j, we propose to use xref:guide-repository.adoc[Spring Data JPA] to build the data access layer using repositories and QueryDSL to build xref:guide-jpa-query.adoc#dynamic-queries[dynamic queries]. We will also use this approach for Quarkus applications, but we need to change the implementation because the devon4j modules are based on reflection, which is not suitable for Quarkus.
In Quarkus we will use Querydsl using code generation. So for this layer, more changes are required and we can't just take the existing code.

First, create a repository interface for your entity class that extends `JpaRepository` (see xref:guide-repository.adoc#repository[here]).

To add QueryDSL support to your project, add the following dependencies to your pom.xml file:

.**pom.xml**
[source,xml]
--------
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.querydsl</groupId>
  <artifactId>querydsl-jpa</artifactId>
  <version>4.3.1</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.querydsl</groupId>
  <artifactId>querydsl-apt</artifactId>
  <scope>provided</scope>
  <version>4.3.1</version>
</dependency>
--------

As mentioned above, we will use QueryDSL with code generation. For this, add the QueryDSL annotation processor to your plugins:

.**pom.xml**
[source,xml]
--------
<plugins>
...
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mysema.maven</groupId>
    <artifactId>apt-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>1.1.3</version>
    <executions>
      <execution>
        <phase>generate-sources</phase>
        <goals>
          <goal>process</goal>
        </goals>
        <configuration>
          <outputDirectory>target/generated-sources/annotations</outputDirectory>
          <processor>com.querydsl.apt.jpa.JPAAnnotationProcessor</processor>
        </configuration>
      </execution>
    </executions>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
--------

To implement the queries, follow the xref:guide-jpa-query.adoc#dynamic-queries[corresponding guide].

Set the following properties in the application.properties file to configure the connection to your database (see also xref:quarkus/guide-quarkus-configuration.adoc#database-configuration[here]):

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.db-kind=...
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=...
quarkus.datasource.username=...
quarkus.datasource.password=...
----

== Logic Layer

For the logic layer, devon4j uses a xref:guide-usecase.adoc[use-case approach]. You can reuse the use case interfaces from the api module of the Spring application. Again, make sure to rename the transfer objects.

Create the appropriate class that implements the interface. Follow the xref:guide-usecase.adoc#implementation[implementation section] of the use-case guide to implement the methods. For mapping the entities to the corresponding transfer objects, see the next section.

== Mapping

For bean mapping, we need to use a completely different approach in the Quarkus application than in the Spring application. For Quarkus, we use MapStruct, which creates the mapper at build time rather than at runtime using reflection. Add the following dependencies to your pom.xml.

.**pom.xml**
[source,xml]
--------
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.mapstruct</groupId>
  <artifactId>mapstruct-processor</artifactId>
  <version>1.4.2.Final</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.mapstruct</groupId>
  <artifactId>mapstruct</artifactId>
  <version>1.4.2.Final</version>
</dependency>
--------

Then you can create the mapper as follows:

.**Mapper**
[source,java]
----
@Mapper(componentModel = "cdi")
public interface YourEntityMapper {
  YourEntityDto map(YourEntity entity);

  YourEntity map(YourEntityDto dto);
  
  ...
}
----

Inject the mapper into your use-case implementation and simply use the methods. The method implementations of the mapper are created when the application is built.

== Service Layer

For the implementation of the service layer, we use the link:guide-rest#jax-rs[JAX-RS] for both Quarkus and Spring applications to create the REST services. Classic devon4j Spring applications rely on Apache CFX as the implemention of JAX-RS.
For Quarkus, we use RESTEasy. Since both are implementations of JAX-RS, much of the Spring application code can be reused.

Take the definition of the REST endpoints from the api module of the Spring application (make sure to rename the transfer objects), inject the use-cases from the logic layer and use them in the REST service methods as follows:

.**REST service**
[source,java]
----
@Path("/path/v1")
public class YourComponentRestService {

  @Inject
  UcFindYourEntity ucFindYourEntity;

  @Inject
  UcManageYourEntity ucManageYourEntity;

  @GET
  @Path("/yourEntity/{id}/")
  public YourEntityDto getYourEntity(@PathParam("id") long id);

    return this.ucFindYourEntity.findYourEntity(id);
  }

  ...
}
----

== Summary

As you have seen, some parts hardly differ when migrating a Spring application to a Quarkus application, while other parts differ more. The above sections describe the parts needed for simple applications that provide REST services with a data access layer.
If you add more functionality, more customization and other frameworks/dependencies may be required. If that is the case, take a look at the corresponding guide on the topic in the devon4j documentation or check if there is a tutorial on the official https://quarkus.io/guides/[Quarkus website].

Furthermore, we can summarize that migrating from a Spring application to a Quarkus representative is not complex. Although Quarkus is a very young framework (release 1.0 was in 2019), it brings a lot of proven standards and libraries that you can integrate into your application.
This makes it easy to migrate and reuse code from existing (Spring) applications. Also, Quarkus comes with Spring API compatibility for many Spring modules (https://quarkus.io/guides/spring-data-jpa[Spring Data JPA], https://quarkus.io/guides/spring-di[Spring DI], https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/extensions[etc.]), which makes it easier for developers to reuse their knowledge.
